Title: A re-sampling approach to cluster count data when the total is not of importance
Authors: Marc Comas-Cufí, Josep Antoni Martín-Fernández, Glòria Mateu-Figueras, Javier Palarea-Albaladejo

Compositional data are strictly positive multivariate observations carrying only relative information between parts. In 1982, Aitchison proposed to analyse compositionally this type of data using the log-ratio approach. Different reasons make that multivariate count observations are not well suited for being considered compositional data. It is the possibility of obtaining count zeros that makes impossible to apply the log-ratio approach directly.

Different strategies have been considered to analyse multivariate count data as compositional. The first approach consists in replacing the zero by a little positive amount. This approach is known as the zero-replacement approach. A second approach consists in modelling the multivariate count observations as obtained by the compounding of a distribution which models a vector of probabilities and a second distribution, usually the multinomial distribution, which models the counting process conditioned to the vector of probabilities. In this second approach, once the distribution has been estimated, the latent variables of this process (the strictly positive probabilities) are analysed using the log-ratio approach.

The two most common prior distributions used in the compounding to model multivariate count data are the Dirichlet and the log-ratio-normal distributions, resulting in the Dirichlet-multinomial and log-ratio-normal-multinomial distributions respectively. Even though the second distribution is superior in terms of modelling, nowadays the process of estimating their parameters is difficult and time-consuming.

In this work we propose to cluster multivariate count data using the compounding approach based on the log-ratio-normal-multinomial distribution but using information of the Dirichlet-multinomial distribution. The proposed approach combines the modelling with classical methods to cluster real data. Moreover, based on the a priori distribution, we propose a re-sampling scheme to analyse properties from the final clustering.

